=pod

=head1 NAME

DICOPD - Details for the dicopd daemon.

Last update: 2004-11-25

=head1 OVERVIEW

C<dicopd> is the master server daemon. Use the C<Dicop::Proxy> package
if you want to setup a proxy.

=head2 Installing

Follow the instructions in INSTALL before you attempt to start the daemon.

=head2 Starting

To start the daemon in the foreground, type

	./dicopd

It is recommended to run it in the background, as well as redirect its STDERR
output to a file with:

	./dicopd 2>stderr.txt &

You can then follow the startup phase with C<tail -f stderr.txt>, which might
take a few seconds to complete.

=head2 Connecting to it, Administration

You can connect with any webbrowser to the running daemon like it where a web
server. If your daemon is on IP 192.168.0.1 and listening on port 8888 (the
default), then connect to:

	http://192.168.0.1:8888/

From there on you should be able to navigate through the pages.

=head2 Troubleshooting

=over 2

=item Taint checking

Please note that

	perl dicopd

will not work, since then the taint checking won't work. You must either start
it with C<-T> on the commandline like this:

	perl -w -T dicopd

or this:

	./dicopd

=item ssh

When using C<ssh> to connect to a machine, and then starting the daemon from
there, it is possible that the daemon is killed when you simple close the
terminal window. You need to logout first, the logout might hang, but you can
then safely close the terminal window.

=back

=head2 PORT, GROUP, USER

The port to bind on, the user and group can be set in C<config/server.cfg>. You
should, for security reasons, create a new user and group for the daemon.

Please make sure that the user and group actually exist, or the daemon will not
start.

=head2 CHROOT

Setting the C<chroot> key in the config file to an non-empty string will cause
the daemon to attempt to change the root directory to the specified directory
while running. The usual setting is:

	chroot	= "."

=head1 AUTHOR

(c) Bundesamt fuer Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik 1998-2004

DiCoP is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the
terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as published by the Free
Software Foundation.

See the file LICENSE or L<http://www.bsi.bund.de/> for more information.

=cut

